Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture guide to using tidy ear in this lecture we're going to discuss
how to clean and tidy up our data using the tidy package and how to install the tidy package as well
as what data tables are.
Let's good and jump to our studio to get started.
OK so here we are at our studio.
Let's go ahead and begin by installing Thaiday ear and the data that table packages in order to do this
we just say installed packages and pass in quotes T I D Y R for tinier.
Wait till that's finished and tidy or is going to help us clean data.
So what do we actually mean by a clean or tidy data set.
Well a tidy data set is where every rose an observation every column is a feature or variable.
This way the data is organized in such a way where every cell is a value for a specific variable or
feature of a specific observation.
This is usually how we've been working with data with the built in data frames such as the empty car's
data frame where every row was a specific observation or vehicle model in every column.
What specific feature or variable of cars such as MPG etc..
Okay.
The other package you want to install is called data table and it's a bit of a complimentary package
to the plier anti-teacher.
So you may be wondering what's different Suena data that table in a data that frame command.
Well loosely speaking you can think of a data table as a data frame with just a few extra features.
Data tables just the package that extends data frames.
And two of its most notable features are usually speed and cleaner syntax.
Hillary should note that the syntax for a data table can be really really similar to the syntax for
a data frame.
So you may be reading some code that already has data tables and set of data frames inside of it and
you may not even notice the difference.
The main difference in a data table in a data frame is usually the speed of the operation data that
table won't do internal copying needlessly and as you usually a lot faster for some basic operations
so just keep that in mind.
We'll revisit this package in a lot more detail later on the course for now.
Let's go ahead and just clear the console going to go out and just copy and paste these install commands
in case you need to reference them and I will clear the console and let's just start by talking about
tight ear nerve to use tight ear.
I'm going to say Library CD t id why are you enter in for good measure also just say data that table
as well.
All right.
So we're going to cover the form most useful functions anti-teacher and that's gather spread separate
and unite.
So first we'll start by talking about gather.
So what I gathered was it's going to collapse multiple columns to keep their values and we're going
to go ahead and do is create some fake data that we need to clean using tidy ear and it is going to
get a copy and paste some code from the notes.
So here I'm just saying make some columns comp a year column from 1988 to 2000 and then let's say four
quarter columns that are just random numbers essentially and combine these to just create essentially
a data frame of some sort of quarterly return for a company.
Let's go ahead and run this.
All right so now if I check my data frame if I have a basically data for it looks like this.
Again you can go ahead and just copy this code from the notes in case you want to create this data frame
.
Continuing on let's talk about the gather function.
So the gather function will collapse multiple columns.
It's a key pair of values.
The data frame here is considered white.
So w i d e wide.
And the reason it's considered wide is because the time variable is represented as quarters.
It's structured in a way that each quarter represents a variable or feature.
What we really want to do is restructure the time component of this data as just a single individual
variable.
Now we can gather each quarter within one column variable and also gather the values associated with
each quarter in a second column variable.
So we're going to show you how we can do this with the gather function.
First thing we're going to do is passenger data frame or data set here ZF.
And then I'm going to go ahead and creates a quarter column and a revenue column and then I'm just going
to pass in the actual columns.
I want to gather together.
So in this case it's the cutesie or one column and I can slice all the way to the cutesie are for column
enough I gather these and see what the results are.
It looks like this.
I've been able to gather these four quarter columns of time information into two columns one for quarter
and then one for revenue.
So what is gather doing it's collapsing these last columns the last argument here in two key hair value
.
So if you want to learn more about how he can use gather we can just say help gather and go him pop
out the help tab here.
You know descrive how it gathers columns.
Like I mentioned it's a key value pairs.
So you're going to say gather with scroll back up here gather your data and then you put in your key
and your value pair and then you pass in the actual columns that you want to gather.
So some specification of the columns and you can scroll down here and see that it actually has a few
examples similar to what we were just doing this sort of operations really useful for stock information
or stock prices quarterly sales data and you want to maybe gather all the time series information into
a single column through some sort of key pair of value Association.
Well it might be a little tricky to understand at first is this sort of slicing notation of the columns
but essentially all I'm saying with this command quarter 1 through quarter 4 is just grabbing these
last four columns.
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 and what ends up happening is that these values here actually become the revenue.
So my key is quarter and the paired value is revenue which is just the actual cell value here and this
sort of tidy up our data to have quarter as one variable or one feature and revenue as another instead
of these time components and then revenue here is just some unmarked unlabelled value in that cell.
So the reason that this formatting is tighter or cleaner than this first formatting is that quarter
one isn't actually a feature or a variable it's some sort of time constraint.
And if we see something like seventy point ninety six that doesn't actually mean a value of quarter
it's a revenue value in this case.
So we want to label it as such as we did here and the second data frame and we can use gather to do
that sort of key value pairs association and we can do the same sort of operation just by using the
pipe operator.
So if we say death and then we have the pipe operator and then we just call it gather and then we can
skip passing in the data center using our key value pair revenue and then the actual columns we want
to pass in and we get the same result.
Okay.
So let's go in and move on to spread.
So spread is essentially the complement of gather and that's how actually gets the name.
Let me go ahead and copy some code from the notes to create our data that we're going to work with.
I'm going to go ahead and clear this copy and paste this stock information which is essentially just
going to make up some stock information for us may go in and run the source here clear the console cycle
stocks get some centrally random stock information.
So has some time data to it so some sort of time stamp by day and then three features or variables x
y and z.
So let me just go ahead and show the head of stocks now while we work with this.
So head of stocks.
There it is.
OK the first thing I'm going to do here is actually gather the data to go ahead and reinforce what we
just learned about gathering data.
I'm going to go ahead and make a new variable called stocks
gathered in a sign it stocks pipe operator and then I want to go ahead and call that gather function
.
I don't have to pass in my data right now because I'm using the pipe operator.
So I'll go ahead and go straight to the key value pair the key value pair that I'll create is stock
and then price and then the columns I want to do this with are X through Z.
So instead of actually doing something like this x colon Z just to make it even more clear all passen
X comma y come easy.
So this is the exact same thing.
Just hopefully this may be a clear notation for you in passing in the columns and this is a key value
pair for gather like go ahead and take a look at what the head of stocks gathered looks like.
Looks something like this hopefully this looks really similar to the quarter information we're just
working with I have time and then have a key value pair with stock and price as key value Perry created
and then X versus the actual amount there.
And so the reason again that this is tidy or clean data is that this actually is the actual cell value
.
Now corresponds to price.
Otherwise we have this cell value corresponding to a variable.
In this case X which may or may not actually reference the value of whatever's in that cell here it's
quite clear that this does represent the price of a stock labeled x.
Okay let's go ahead and continue on by spreading this data back out so I can call spread using a pipe
operator if I wanted to.
So I'll say stocks that gathered and I'm going to go ahead and use a pipe operator to call a spread
on it.
And usually you would pass in the data first and the spread of that the same reason the pipe operator
.
I don't need to.
And I just actually put in the columns are the key value pair that I want to spread by this case.
It was stock price and there we were able to spread the data.
If I didn't actually want to use this pipe operator I could've just said spread stocks gathered or stock
stock gathered Khama and then it could have passed in the stock column and the price column and I would
have gotten the same results.
So it's spread by more than just that we could have also spread maybe buy time and price.
It look a little weirder but essential make all the rows the X Y and Z of the stocks.
So I'm going to show how you can do that.
I'll go ahead and call spread Passons stock stock gather.
And then I will spread by the time column and the price column and I notice I get something quite a
bit different cent. Now my rose each represents a stock either X Y or Z.
We can imagine these are some sort of stock ticker and that each column is an actual dates.
And here we have a value.
Now whether or not this is tidy or good data is kind of up to you but I would say there's still not
so great because the actual value in this case will say negative 0.6 3.
That's not some sort of time stamp reformations that's not a feature of this date column it's an actual
price.
So we want to try to have the sort of sell information line up with the column name like it did in the
original spread information.
Here are the gathered information here where we have this value is an actual price.
And this character is an actual stock versus over here we have this character is under the date column
but it's actually a price feature but we don't have any price labels anywhere.
So that's the main difference between something that is tidy and some data that is not tidy or not perfectly
clean.
Again it really depends on your situation on what works best for you.
So just keep in mind what situation you're in how you want your data to be presented and what works
best for your analysis.
You don't have to tidy up your data if it doesn't work for you.
In any case you're used to work with Excel a lot.
Or maybe some other sacer SPSS programming like language we can think of these as sort of an analogous
to a pivot table in Excel.
All right finally we're going to learn about the two last functions for tinier which is separate separate
and unite.
OK so let's start by learning about separate.
So separate is going to be given either regular expressions or a vector of character positions.
And what separates going to allow us to do is turn a single character column into multiple columns.
And to start by creating a data frame with all say data that frame all Pessin a vector.
Let's say we just call this vector x or this column X and it's going to be a vector and they will say
that x B that y z z.
So again this wouldn't just make this really obvious by saying this is new.
Well if I called ZF I get my new column.
First row was a null value and then have a that Expwy that Y see that Z as characters.
And what I can go ahead and do is call separate to try to turn a single character column into multiple
columns and I'll show you an example of that.
I call separate pass in my data frame.
And then when I go ahead and do is pass in my column name that I want to separate.
In this case I want to pass that call to separate and then I pass in a vector of the new column names
in this case are going to try to separate this into two new columns.
First column I want to call ABC.
Second call me I want to call X Y Z.
So if I go ahead and run this notice able to actually automatically separate this column the single
columns need that call into two columns ABC and x y z.
So you may be wondering now how did this separate function no to separate the single column value into
C and z.
Or did it know to get rid of this period.
Well by default the separator argument that you can pass into separate will try to separate non alphanumeric
characters but you can signify what you want the separate or separation value to be.
So I want to go ahead and recreate that data frame.
Well let's go ahead an instead of a dot X I will go ahead and say a dash x b dash Y and see Dash Z.
So if I take a look at my data frame DSF I have a null value that Scheck's be that NYC dash city etc.
Let's call separate or separate again.
First thing to do is pass in my data and I'm going to go and actually just label these arguments.
So it's really clear.
So data is going to pass in the call.
So the bear column name.
So if we look above remember that was new that calls to the column again is new that call it's the that's
the column actually want to separate and then I'm going to say into is the third official argument.
So last time I just passed in the vector of the new column names that stands for the into.
So we can think of this as taking this data take this new column or this column value and separate it
into these columns and this case is separated into two columns.
First column is going to be well say ABC which put them in lowercase this time.
Second column is going to be lowercase x y z and then finally I can indicate a SEP argument which is
what I want to separate by this case.
I want to separate by a dash and there we go.
It was able to separate this column just like that if I did it add that Sep arguments and still try
to separate this.
It still would have worked because that dash is a non alphanumeric character meaning it's not a number
or it's not a letter.
So automatically separate on those kind of characters if your data doesn't really work well for some
sort of automatic separation like that.
You can go ahead and pass in whatever pattern or regular expression you want to separate by.
Again the basic syntax is you say separate in the data frame that you're working with the column that
you want to separate in the columns you want to separate it into and then if you want or need to.
You can as Sep arguments and then pass in the character you want to actually split on or separate.
OK.
And then finally a complement to this is unite.
So you're right it's just a convenience function to paste together multiple columns into one.
And the syntax is essentially going to be exactly the same as this separate call except it's going to
do the reverse sort of saying into it's going to take away those columns and put them into a new column
.
So it's going to unite them together.
It's going to show you how we can do this.
I'm going to take the separate results and store it into DFT Sep.
So if I call the SEP I get that separated value don't worry about those warnings.
They're going to clear this and say DFA Sep.
All right so we can unite these columns together by saying unite pass in the data frame I'm working
with in this case it's DFA dot Sep that separated data frame and then I add in the name of the column
that I want to add.
So we'll go ahead and call this column let's say let's call it just new joined us.
Well and then I pass in the list of columns I want to join this case it's ABC and x y z and there we
have it.
There is my new joint column and note that by default it joined if an underscore.
But you can actually add a third argument in here Sep equals an earlier using separate.
That indicated what we wanted to separate on if we add it to the Unite call indicate how we want to
join them if we want to put anything in between them.
So let's go out and put three dashes in between them when we join them.
And there we have it we have these three dashes.
Note that this is no longer a no value.
It's a character string and a dash dash dash and a.
OK.
So those are the basics of type here.
Hopefully you won't have to use Tidy are too much.
If your data set is already in a format you expect it in.
But in case you need to manipulate or play around for data to get in a good format for maybe a machine
learning algorithm or your basic analysis or visualization protocols you can use these four functions
of time here and look up the notes on how best to use them to clean your data.
OK thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture